It's hard to explain a rage, you know, of being angry that I was a witness because I didn't want
to make him angry and make a fight. I wanted to have a good marriage, you know. A few times I'd
get up in the middle of the night and finish my watchtower, the finished studying for the book
study in the bathroom. It was a safe place. I didn't have the nice family and you're bringing
your kids to the hall and doing things with people. It felt impossible to be a good witness.
If anybody called and asked for sister-crosby, it was flipping the angry switch to my husband.
On a bad day, I did feel sometimes like dying or it'd be easier to die.
Before I was baptized, based on my father's example and the Bible truths that I had learned,
I believed that maintaining Christian neutrality was the right thing to do.
That's why I refused military training. I received a two-year sentence and was then transferred
to prison. I thought I would meet other brothers, but in my location, there was not a single
brother there, living with inmates in a cramped cell. I often experienced emotional issues.
During my school years, I experienced much pressure from the teachers,
because my mom was one of Jehovah's Witnesses. They often threatened that they would take us
children, because I have a younger brother and an older sister to an orphanage.
The work of Jehovah's Witnesses was under ban, so we had to be very cautious and careful.
The search lasted 12 hours. After that,
Alive Tina was taken to a temporary detention facility,
and I was interrogated until two in the morning. I said that I had a serious illness,
and therefore I needed to eat. But in spite of that, they didn't allow it.
For four months, we did not see each other at all. Every morning, I prayed to endure this test,
and it helped me feel calm. After one court session, as I was waiting to return to myself,
I met a young female prisoner. And she and I were talking about the name of God,
and she said to me, wait, wait, wait. I'm going to write the name on the back of this piece of paper
so that I don't forget it. And this girl came out after the search and said,
when the inspector searched me, she looked at the piece of paper and saw God's name.
And I said to her, don't worry, now neither the inspector nor you will forget the name of God.
I prayed a lot to just do the right thing. And then I realized why it's in the Lord's prayer
to pray to be forgiving because you don't always want to forgive the person,
but we need to, we have to. And it works when it prayed for help about that.
Meetings in studying were my lifeline to Jehovah besides praying.
Just made me always feel like a witness, but assemblies were hard because it was just hard telling
them. Just going made a man agree. A lot of times I never knew what I'd come home to after
a assembly or a convention. And I came home as usual. He wasn't there when I came home.
There was 30 seconds. He just went in to go and I pulled up and got out of the car.
He had been waiting there all day for me because he wanted to come out and say something to the
people that dropped me off. Probably not very nice. I think I always felt Jehovah's hand when I came
home. But I was determined to spend my time well. So I applied myself to personal study in order
to progress spiritually. I prayed earnestly to Jehovah God. Jehovah God, I would be so grateful
if you assigned just one brother to myself. Soon, two brothers were assigned to myself.
The three of us tried our best to fully enjoy the meetings. Doing so helped us to endure.
At times, issues would arise among the brothers too. Practically no one had any literature at home.
So the meetings were the only source of spiritual food. We had 337 songs in our songbook back then.
And I knew almost all of them by heart. So when I got anxious or uneasy,
instead of sinking deep into my thoughts, I simply hummed kingdom songs. I'd prayed earnestly
and it linked to Jehovah to remain calm toward the teacher. Even though he scolded me or lowered my grades,
I did not consider him an enemy. Some people might think, well, we'd have a better marriage if I
stopped being a witness. Because people stop studying because their husbands are opposed.
Well, how do you feel about Jehovah? What do you think? How does he feel?
If you depend on Jehovah for the help, he'll give it to you and you'll feel it. It built your faith.
And you know that you just got through something. You can't believe you just did that.
It actually happened. And you know that he helped you. I continued to be a witness.
I could be a witness. It really happened. I've been pioneering for 13 years and I've really
enjoyed it. I got into study with people and I like talking to people about Jehovah.
It really makes you feel good. And even if people aren't nice, they're getting a witness.
And they have a chance. And who knows what'll happen in the future.
One thing I learned was that not everything works out the way I expect.
Even as an elder serving the congregation, I still experience differences of opinion with the
brothers. But the endurance I learn back then has helped me to peacefully resolve those conflicts
so that I don't become a stumbling block to others. The endurance I learn back then
has also helped me maintain a happy and peaceful family life with my wife and two sons.
Even when problems occur in the family. When I watch my sons who are now serving
alternative civilian service, boldly defend their faith and give a witness in court,
I was reminded of how Jehovah has always provided my father and me during our imprisonment years
ago. And now my two sons are strength, tenure, as well as everything we need to overcome challenges.
In prison, I learned that I had to wait on Jehovah and treat other prisoners kindly.
And so I was always ready to witness to them. Jehovah helped me understand that this was not a
time for self-pity, but a time to think about others. When you're busy with the kingdom work,
time flies by very quickly. In the mid-1990s, my wife and I came to visit our parents.
So one day, on my way to the store through the park, I saw the same history teacher at some distance.
He lowered his head and was about to cry and said, Ivan, I have caused you so much trouble.
And yet you came to me and addressed me so kindly.
From this incident, I learned that it is important to always understand whom the real source of
persecution is. Not people, but Satan, who uses them as a tool. And just as Jesus said,
that people don't know what they're doing, I felt that this history teacher also didn't know what
he was doing at the time. But I am well aware that if you sow a good seed, it is bound to bear good
fruit. You just have to wait a little.